RailsConf 2014 - Ruby Hero Awards

GREGG POLLACK: Hello. Hey. It works. Thank you guys for coming out early. I know there were some parties last night, and you made it here. Congratulations. I'm Gregg Pollack. This is Carlos Souza, and you're listening to Ruby 5. No, not really. Thought I'd put that out there for those of you who listen.

So, we're doing the Ruby Hero Awards. In case you're not familiar, the Ruby Hero Awards are put together to give some people some recognition that they deserve, that they don't otherwise get. We're in our seventh year. Started in 2008, so like, that was like the third RailsConf we started doing the Ruby Hero Awards.

2013 Ruby Heroes, in case you're not familiar. You might see some recognized names there. Here was the 2012 Ruby Heroes. And then if you go back in time, the really interesting thing about this is that a lot of these people were, are well-known now, but at the time of doing the rewards they weren't. They were just hacking away, you know, some of them made it onto the Rails core team. Some of them made great impacts, I feel like, on my life, on other peoples' life probably, in this room.

But, before they were so well-known, they just, you know, worked really hard and then we recognized them on stage here with Ruby Hero Awards.

Oh, and a lot of these people, I realized last night, these are the people, you know, if Ruby's down here, a lot of these people are the ones that, you know, created floors up, you know, on these Ruby Heroes. And then maybe your software comes up here. All right. To bring it back to Yehuda's talk.

Now, a lot of them are educators as well. They're not just coders. So why do we do this? Well just to briefly give you the background, we do this podcast called Ruby 5. Twice weekly Ruby news podcast. It's also a newsletter. You can subscribe now, if you don't listen to things. And what we realized, when we feature doing new libraries for Ruby and Rails on a week basis, is that there's certain people that go above and beyond. There are certain people that are producing library after library, or educational product after educational video, that don't get the recognition they deserve.

So we realized, well maybe what we should do is, is give them an awards ceremony, so that we can get some of these people that work hard for our benefit up on stage to give them the round of applause that they deserve. So this year, we have six hundred and thirty-one nominations. In case you're not familiar, so what we do is we have that website I had a second ago. People can submit their nominations, and then we go, so it's not a popularity contest, we go back to the Ruby Heroes of previous years and ask them to take under consideration the nominations, and they together vote for who gets these six awards you see up here on stage.

So there's six Ruby Hero Awards we gotta give away today, and with any luck, all of them should be here today. So, oh. The other thing that I thought was interesting. As I was going through and collecting information about all these different people, I thought I would go ahead and give it away what four of them are. Are you ready?

There's four of them. But I thought this was pretty impressive. So four of these guys are amazing, well, really all of them are amazing open source contributors, contributors. I also, so a couple people I have to thank of course before we get to it. I gotta thank Ruby Central for letting us come up here on stage and, and give these awards away and support us. Also got to thank everybody who voted. Was there anybody here who voted for Ruby Heroes, nominated people? You're awesome. Thank you.

Also gotta thanks to Code School. They paid the bills. They paid for these awards. In case you're not familiar, we've got a booth down there, and we've got three courses that we put out that Carlos has had a lot to do with. He's the author of these Rails 4 courses. If you need to get up to speed, check him out. Come down to our booth later.

Also, thanks to everybody who voted. And before we get onto it, I want to make sure, the best way that we can keep this community strong and the best way that you can motivate people to keep on being awesome, is through positive reinforcement, through compliments. So I challenge you guys, if you see somebody at this conference, it could be somebody who gives a conference talk, somebody who created some open source library that you use, and you see them here, please, please take a moment to set them aside and say, I really appreciate you did that library. It really helped me.

A little of that positive reinforcement can go a long way. Especially when you're, you know, working by yourself in a room, coding away, and you don't really know, you don't really get to be in front of people that you impact on a daily basis.

All right. So, if you hear your name called today, you're gonna want to come up on stage. We've got awards here. And we're gonna stand over here until everybody's called, and you gotta do the traditional group picture, and then we've got boxes for the awards if, if you're a Ruby Hero.

So, I'm gonna hand it over to Carlos here, to announce the first Ruby Hero.

CARLOS SOUZA: The first Ruby Hero looks like this on GitHub, and you might know this hero through their contribution to education through the Ruby Rogues podcast every week and also she's a pretty active conference speaker. She helped teach at gSchool and she also put out this awesome project called exercism dot io that helps people practice coding and practice testing, TDD.

Here's what some people had to say about her. She inspired me to get into open source projects for the first time, and devotes so much of her time to teaching others how to write clean, beautiful code. The hero I'm speaking of is Katrina Owen.

G.P.: Awesome. Let's move on to hero number two, who looks something like this on GitHub. Now, this guy has actually been nominated several years in a row for Ruby Heroes. And so, just over the years, he's given back a lot to the Ruby community. If you've been in the Ruby community for a couple years, you know his name by now hopefully, from some of the conference talks that he's given and some of the really meaningful work that he's done.

One of the things that I most admire about him is his work helping kids learn Ruby through something called KidsRuby. He's also done this sort of initiative through events, like Kids Code Camp. And also recently, over the last year or two, he's put a tremendous amount of work into a Ruby library called Artoo, which allows you to use Ruby to program all sorts of robots.

Here's a quote that somebody said about him. He is a champion for Ruby, using it to teach programming to children through KidsRuby, and also providing awesome robotics framework, Artoo. In case you're not familiar with all those clues, the person I'm talking about here is Ron Evans.

C.S.: Hero number three. This is what they look like on GitHub. He's also a contributor and he helps maintain the Boxen project, which helps you provision your local development environment, gets you up and running pretty quick. He also is the maintainer for the simple_form gem, which I'm sure a lot of you use. He is a member of the Rails core team, and he's up there with the top contributors, top five contributors.

And here's what some people had to say about him. He has done amazing contributions to Rails, devise, simple_form, and other open source projects, dedicating lots of hours of his extra time to improve our lives. I don't know if people understand how important he is to Rails. He's basically a second Tenderlove.

The person I'm speaking of is Rafael Mendonca Franca.

G.P.: All right. Hero number four. I think he's got the most commits. I mean, look at that. It's solid. You probably know him. He's the, like, maintainer, main maintainer right now of the Twitter Ruby gem. He also helps maintain and create the Twitter client, command line client. Also, Rails admin. If you're familiar with Rails admin, this is the guy who created it and helps maintain it now. And as I was going through and doing my research with these heroes, I would occasionally go back to like the very first commit to see, did they start this library? And with Rails admin, I found something really interesting.

So I went back to the first commit, and I was like Rails admin, hmm. Where did the inspiration for this come from? And all you had to do was look at the last couple commits. That's second, third, and fourth commit. What was even more interesting, is you would scroll up through more commits, and I found, I found something else there too that's kind of interesting. And then I scroll up even more and I find PHP my admin. No, I'm just kidding. I'm just kidding. Wouldn't that be funny?

Anyways. So, this person also is a huge contributor to a bunch of open source projects that we all use on a daily basis. Things like Bundler, RubyGems, and Thor, amongst other projects.

Here's a quick quote. He contributes more to open source than anyone I know, and he's willing to do the grunt work. It's not always glamorous, but he's in the trenches: Christmas, birthday, everyday.

The person that we're talking about here, of course, is Erik Michaels-Ober.

C.S.: Hero number five. Here's them on GitHub. He is a contributor and the maintainer for the Purugin library, which is a Ruby Minecraft plugin. And he's also been co-leading the JRuby project for a long time. So he's been helping spread the Ruby's on the JVM.

Here's some quotes of what people had to say about this hero. He's heroic because he's the number two contributor to JRuby, and I don't think many people who know who he is. He solves difficult problems and always has time to help people out.

The hero we're talking about here is Thomas Enebo.

G.P.: All right. One more to go. This person has created more gems than probably just about everybody in this room. About 150 gems over the last many, many years. He's been in the Ruby community for a very long time. Just to highlight a couple of the gems that he's worked on more recently, you've got the map gem, you've got the dow gem, you've got the main gem, you've got the openfor gem, you've got the systemu gem, you've got the main gem. You guys get the pattern here. He's done a lot.

Now I found this one primarily interesting. The testy library. It's a BDD testing framework for Ruby that's mad at the world and plans to kick its ass in seventy-eight freaking lines of code by ruthlessly removing lines of resting framework.

I added the animated gifs. It wasn't in there. But I thought it was a really interesting point, because there's certainly a lot of, you know, we don't need that many lines of testing framework to be really effective. I thought that was a great statement to make.

Here's some quotes. He has, easily, been the biggest influence on my Ruby style. While everyone else was cargo-culting the style of Rails code, he was doing his own thing, in his own unique way. He's a relatively undiscovered treasure chest in the Ruby community. The work he did with Ruby to mesh, to mash the satellite together is top notch, and the body of work out there on GitHub is impressive to say the least.

The person I'm talking about here, of course, in case you don't know, is Ara T. Howard.

C.S.: All right.

G.P.: Why don't you guys come up to the front?

C.S.: So, to finally announce, these are the 2014 Ruby Hero Awards Ruby Heroes.
