RailsConf 2014 - Humor in the Code: The Future of Everything, Humbly Stated - Baratunde Thurston

BARATUNDE THURSTON: Good morning RailsConf 2014.

How ya guys doing? Do a big clap for yourselves.

I haven't done anything yet. But clap for you.

More louder. More louder. More louder. Yeah! Noise!

While I watching these all-stars get their awards, I

actually, I was responsible for three-hundred thirty gems in

that moment. I'm so good at Ruby right now.

Take that node.js! What?

I was very, very excited about Katrina's victory. I

was sitting two seats next to her and just

felt like, maybe I had something to do with

it. I didn't. But it's nice to feel certain

things even if you're not responsible.

I want to start in the beginning, for me,

as far back as I'm able to go with

documentation so far. This is a photo of my

mother's grandfather. My great grandfather, Benjamin Lonesom, born just

as slavery was wrapping up in the U.S. Born

in Caroline County, Virginia and taught himself to read,

moved to Washington D.C., helped build roads and design

the highway system there, the road system there. And

he had several kids. One of whom was my

mother's mother.

Her name was Lorain Martin. She was a very

proud woman. Very accomplished. Especially considering the timing of

her own life. She was, I found out much

later in my life, and at the end of

my mother's own life, the first black employee at

the U.S. Supreme Court building. Now this is something

my mother never told me and my older sister.

It's a weird family secret to keep. Right. Family

secrets are supposed to be embarrassing. Like, so and

so had a leg longer than the other. So

and so voted for, you know, he who shall

not be named.

But you don't, like, shh, quietly, grandma was a

civil rights hero. Don't tell people. They might respect

us. Like. What's the down side? I don't. I

can't understand exactly. But they had a very, very

fractured relationship. So fractured that my sister and I

found out about this historic fact by going through

my mother's posessions after she died, and we found

this clip. Like, why is grandma hanging out with

Jimmy Carter? What, is there another story we don't

know? What's going on here?

So, yeah. My, my grandmother and I didn't have

much of a relationship. I heard stories. I remember

she smelled like, what was it? Orange juice, cigarette

smoke, vodka. That was a nice, strong memory for

like a five year old little boy. And she

was so busy with her own life, she travelled,

she had this job, she was active in her

church. She wasn't always super excited about the duties

of being a mom herself, with, with her own

daughter. And I'm not sure how she can do

that, because this is my mother at age four.

Super, super adorable. Like, who wouldn't want to be

around? Like, look at the cheeks. You can see

where I get my cuteness from. It's pretty obvious.

So she ships my mother, at age eight, the

year is 1948, to a rural boarding school in

Pennsylvania. A Catholic boarding school, and my mother didn't

like it. And I know she didn't like it

cause she wrote a letter saying she didn't like

it.

For those who can't see this or maybe in

general, I will share the text. Dear mother, I

am having fun but I do not like it

here. So that was like a hint that she

didn't like it. I am mad at you. Please

send me some cookies and a Sparkle Plenty doll.

They can have dolls here. Please send it because

I do not have anything to play with. Yours

truly, Arnita.

That's a sad state of affairs. It's also a

sad state of handwriting. I'm hating on my mom's

handwriting but that's pretty, the lines are all over

the place. She needs to work on the formation.

In the lower-left corner you see some very, very

clear easy-to-read handwriting. It just says, over.

And when you turn this letter over, you find

another letter, which says, if your little girl is

dissatisfied, we'd be glad to have her bed for

children who are anxious to come. Signed Sister. And

I think when she wrote it, she like barely

moved a muscle. Like, sister.

This was an early prototype of the NSA prison

program. They were testing it out on would-be terrorists.

Also known as little black girls who want cookies.

Cause they may also want to vote eventually, and

you've gotta nip those rights in the bud before

they get out of hand.

My mom didn't last long in the school. She

came back. She finished up in D.C. She was

a features editor at her high school news paper.

She's here dressed very appropriately for the era, with

the dress cut below the knees, and a basket

presumably filled with positive, affirmative thoughts about the state

of democracy in America, I am sure of it.

It's a happy time. It's the 50s. Everything was

great.

And, things shifted for her a little bit. I

would say her social network shifted. She started hanging

out with a different type of crowd. A crowd

that looked more like this. This was a good

friend of my mom's at the time. His name

was El Dorado. I don't know very much detail,

except that his name was El Dorado. I don't

need anymore detail, except that his name was El

Dorado, and you, you look at all the cool

hunting and trend-setting and millenial obsession and what's gonna

happen and who's gonna buy what and what's hip

hop cool, zip zap bop. None of it matters.

The last cool human to walk the earth was

El Dorado. Look at him again. Let it sink

in. And let your own lack of cool just

be out there. I feel it too. Every time

I show this slide I feel less awesome.

So then my mom's out in the streets. She's

challenging authority in some way. Metaphorically in the streets

outside of her mom's own office. This is walking

down 16th street, Northwest Washington D.C., where I would

later grow up. My Uncle, Max Park in the

background. Yay! (00:06:52) For me growing up. Thank you

so much for cheering.

The hormonal process! And I, my momma's right there

in the middle. Her eyes focused. Not on the

prize, but on the camera. Because you never know.

You might end up in a keynote presentation in

the future. Selfies before it was hot. All right.

When you have a, a mother like this, you

don't get normal reading materials as a kid. This

is the first book I remember having as a

small child. I was eight years old. And it,

it looked that bad. It was like, is that

blood? What is going on? I'm just mad at

people all of the sudden all of the time

now. I'm protesting Coco Puffs because it's gotta be

racist somehow. I don't know the arguments yet. I'm

not strong enough intellectually to make the argument, but

I'm mad. Thanks mom.

This is the shot outside of our apartment, looking

very Wire-like. This is a, sort of a local

economic grass roots activity that you're seeing here. I,

hand-to-hand commerce, sort of an artisinal, some locally grown,

sort of a kind of thing going on here.

Really native local markets. And my mom just took

these pictures. I still don't. She never fully explained

why she would just take pictures of drug deals

going down. She wasn't an informant. She didn't like

the cops either. But I think she just was

anticipating like, the twenty-year drug dealer reunion, and she

could sell these back, you know. Like when you're

on a roller coaster and it's like, remember when

this happened?

This is middle school graduation for me. That's my

older sister, back to back. Her name is Balinda.

She lives in Lancing, Michigan, and she was, hooray

for living! That's good. You guys are applauding strange,

strange verbs. She was a journalist for twenty-something years,

and worked at the Dallas Morning News. Worked for

Ganette news papers. Worked for the Lancing State Journal

where she was the digital new director and assistant

managing editor, at the same time as I was

director as digital at the Onion. She we basically

had the same job.

Except, sadly, I remember having arguments with her -

not arguments, just observations from her, cause we had

launched our iPhone app and our web traffic was

such and such and such. And she was like,

but I do the real news. I was winning.

Lies were winning, basically.

That's my mom obviously in the center, and that's

me with a little flare of rebellion with my

kente cloth in the form of a tie. Corporate

rebellion. I loved it.

So here's how this family worked. My mother was

the one to raise us and to finance that,

that raising. She had a job as a systems

analyst for the office of the comptroller of the

currency. She was a computer programmer. She started doing

this in the late 1970s. She did not have

a formal college education, not a complete one. I,

in fact, remember sitting in community college classes with

her as she was trying to bolster her IT

and tech skills. So she went from domestic worker,

dinner cooker, paralegal assistant to GS something in the

government ranking system, which enabled to afford me going

to school that I was graduating from here now,

Sidwell Friends School. My sister going off to be

a journalist. All because of computer programming.

She is the original black girl's code. That's my

mom. Without any actual non-profit behind it. And that

had another big influence. I obviously had the Apartheid

thing in my brain from a early age sort

of hacking into my awareness. But we also had

computers constantly as a young human. The first family

on the block with a computer. I played Dr.

J and Lary Bird on the internet super early,

thanks to my school and my 1993. And this

is a great shot, my sister captured it. This

is me graduating from Harvard University, 1999. And my

mom embraced me and she said, We did it!

I was like, what do you, what do you

mean we? Moms! I took the test. But it

was a metaphorical and some real practical ways we,

because of the generations that it took to create

this moment, because of the mentors I had because

of the studies, because of the investment - financial,

moral, and caloric that had been made in me

to get to this point.

Now, when I showed up on campus, I was

convinced I was gonna be a computer science major.

I had been super internet kid. I was always

the kid fixing my friend's computers. And then I

took the intro to computer science class in the

fall of 1995, which meant C, and I did

not end up majoring in computer science. Because I

discovered the power of the semi colon to ruin

everything. Everything. Like, if you misplaced a semi colon

in an essay, people still get what you mean.

Right, they may get judgmental about it - that

should have been an m-dash - but they don't,

you know. They don't act like you said nothing.

I'm like fifteen pages in, I've said nothing? What

about all my loops and shit - it's nothing?

So I was like yeah, OK programming. I'm gonna

take a little break from you. And I, I

majored in philosophy, which was actually not that far.

A different sort of anal retentiveness. In terms of

the analytic world and logic and everything. So I

couldn't fully escape that, and I was one of

the first online editors at the Harvard Crimson, our

news paper, and paid for school with a job

testing software. I tried to stay close to this

world, even as I drifted, you know, from the

hard core flavors of this world.

But a lot of it comes down to, to

this woman who helped make that possible. Now, my

sister, she ended up on a different and even

more beautiful path, I think. She started teaching yoga.

She got really excited about it and got really

into it, and she was bugged by the notion

of yoga as just the province of super thin

and lithe and lemon and six dollar pants and.

She started teaching it for free, for a donation

based price, in the hood in Lancing. And she

eventually left the news paper altogether to be full-time,

teaching donation-based yoga in the hood, in Lancing. Which

is just the worst endorsement for the newspaper industry,

I think.

This is a veteran, award-winning person who's like, I

want to teach free yoga to people with no

money. I think there's a bigger future in it.

So, this is my obligatory family shout out. This

is my sister's Twitter account. She's great. You're in

the midwest here. You can make your way up

to Lancing and support some of the work that

she is doing. So what happens after this foundation

is laid of this great older sibling, of this

mother, of this infusion of politics and technology, and

doing all these newsy type things?

Well, I obviously ended up here at America's finest

news source, and worked for the Onion for five

years. And it was a great way that I

got that job. They posted a job for politics

editor in the fall of 2007. I just moved

to New York from Boston, and I was like,

that's my job. They don't know it yet, but

they'll come around. And I applied for that job

and got through part of the interview process and

they said, what, wouldn't you like to be the

web editor as well? And like oversee everything we're

doing online. And I'm like, yeah, like, that's like

another job, right?

Like, no, same job. So, is it like more

pay? No, no. Same pay. The Onion negotiation style

is very aggressive, and of course I said yes,

cause it was the greatest job I ever had,

and got to play around and, and have a

lot of fun there. I also wrote a book

toward the tail-end of my tenure there, a very

humble identity guide, and, with a very subtle marketing

message which I wouldn't want to push people too

much. Some people will just be all heavy-handed with

the like buy, buy, buy. It's like, no, no,

no, no, let people come to this on their

own terms.

Face the consequences.

So what's been fun about this, the book is

a memoir, you know. It covers some of the

ground I just did but in a lot more

words. So, you don't even have to read those

chapters. It's also got this guide to sort of

a, this how-to satirical guide. How to be the

black friend. How to speak for all black people.

How to be the black employee. How to be

the next black president.

And then there are a series of interviews that

I conducted with a panel of experts. I call

them my black panel. And what made them expert

is that they were born black, and so they

had decades of experience in the game. And so

we wanted to kind of test that out, and

I balanced the scales as easily as I could.

I had three black men, I had three black

women, and as a control group, I had one

white Canadian man.

And I asked them very essential questions. When did

you first realize you were black, which is like

an interesting questions. Like, when do you first realize

you're anything? You know there's, somebody from the outside

usually says something weird about you. How black are

you? Preferably quantify it. Did you ever wish you

weren't black? And can you swim?

Very grounded, very scientific questions. And the best part

about my, my control group answer. So I didn't

want just any white guy. I wanted the whitest

white guy I could find. And, so I had

to go north. Colder, right. Canada. And so I

also wanted somebody who was a real authority. So

I got Christian Lander, who wrote Stuff White People

Like and was behind that whole blog. So he

like put himself out there speaking for white peoples'

interests. And he did a great job, for those

of you who are white. A couple of you.

You have a great ambassador in Christian Lander. You

should send him some kind of, like, re-up or

vote for him again. I don't know how it

works in your councils. I just, I watched Game

of Thrones. I feel like its messy. But, you

should, thumbs up in the arena for him. Let

him fight another fight.

So that was fun. The other fun thing has

been seeing people start to play with the, the

meme of the book, and something that I didn't

necessarily drive but have witnessed and, and enjoyed is

instagram around How to be Black. And you start

to see this blend of pure old school editorial

with flatter, networked world where everybody can publish. And

so pictures started to emerge on this theme.

And every picture's got a story of at least

a thousand words. Preferably less if you have a

good editor. In this case, the man holding the

book prior to this photo was white. Still is.

The book's not that good. I mean it's not,

disclaimer. Spoiler alert. You're gonna stay whatever you are.

But, he walked into the subway and was somehow

coincidentally surrounded by this group of black men who

were curious about the object in his hand. And

so they said, what, good sir, are you reading?

Which is just, how older black men talk now.

I don't know how many of you are in

touch, but. It was decided last week. And, and

their faces capture the whole range of reaction that

I've seen on the internet to the book.

You got a dopey smirk on the left. Doesn't

get it. Checked out. Not for him. That's OK.

That's OK. Not everything is for everybody. Moving right

along. Super engaged reader. Probably gonna miss a train

cause he's so into it. Healthy sceptic. Engaged sceptic.

He's gonna take to like Reddit or like some

Twitter hash tag hatred later. But, right now he's

building up his arguments.

And then you got the brother on the right.

He's a special case. Cause he's offended. Cause he

doesn't need some stupid book to tell him how

to be black. Obviously. Look at his matching turtle

neck. Leather jacket. Baseball cap. He's got blackness on

lock down.

And then you see people really playing around, more

fun. Some of these are from Tumblr, some are

from Reddit. Every six to seven weeks, it actually

front pages on Reddit, cause Reddit's like a clown

fish. It just forgets itself constantly. It'll be like,

look what I found! It's like no, idiot, we

found this thirteen times already.

But it's fun to watch people have the same

argument over and over again. The wisdom of crowds,

I believe, is what they call that. And then,

you know, these people staging. Really interesting moments.

And the book has been assigned in schools, so

the compulsory mark is the best one. I encourage

you all to get into that. If credits are

on the line then you have a growth mark.

It's nice.

So, since then, I've tried to think about how

and where to bring these threads together. Bring the

story-telling. Bring the humor. Bring the, the creativity, broadly

speaking, into a home bigger than just my body,

cause I'm a finite being with limited capacity and

I'm gonna die at some point. And companies. They

live forever. And they have better tax benefits. So

I started one. It's better to be a company

in this country. If you haven't figured that out,

there should be a session on that.

So, I started this company called Cultivated Wit, as

I left the Onion. And it's based on this

quote from Horace. So, a cultivate wit, one that

badgers less, can pursuade all the more. Artful ridicule

can address contentious issues more competently and vigorously than

can severity alone. And so that is our, sort

of, marching order to try to bring these threads

together. It also means that we have a really

cool website. And I'm gonna risk everything and take

you to a live web demo thing.

Keyboard. So. Here's what we're up to. First of

all, a little winky. That's fun. Yeah? Eh? Eh?

It's nice. Right. Trying to build some personality into

some basic things. So this is, you know, we're

a company that does this and that.

So, we are operating on some four bands, at

least. One of which is doing marketing and digital

story-telling and kind of making capaigns that are beautiful,

with design. We merged with an animation and design

studio out of San Francisco. And so work on

behalf of good clients to tell good stories.

We do an event series called Comedy Hack Day,

that I'm gonna tell you more about in detail

later, but it's the best comedy show you've ever

seen and certainly the best hack-a-ton. Building tools. We

have a little tiny software department of one, a

developer, we feed him Red Bull. And two hours

of sunlight per week.

And he's doing great. He's doing really, really great.

He's a co-founder. And then we do these things.

We do speaking and work shops. We also have

some fun things on the blog, whatever, whatever. Best

emails ever. I wanted to take you through one

of the interactions on our site.

So we created this thing called Section Four, and

it's like, do you care to enter? Well yeah,

I wanna, I wanna enter Section Four. There's no

one see-. OK. Cool. Great. The thing is that

you're clicking this pretty quickly. We're worried you're not

taking this seriously. One more time, are you sure?

Yup, I am sure.

Join us now. What is your name? OK. Great.

Got that down. And you just gave your name

to a strange website. You're not doing much in

the way- What do you like to be called.

Grand Puba. OK. Good. In case of emergency, what

email address can we reach you in order to

ask for a phone number? Awesome. Let's do that.

How would you rate your experience so far? This

is, I would say, a four. Next question. What

is your super power? You have to bringing something

to the table if you're going to - let

you in, at the very least. I would say

it's growing on patience. Let's get you into Section

Four. How would you rate your experience so far?

It's sliding. Last thing before you enter. Does it

bother you to have to jump through so many

hoops? It actually did. Ha, well guess what. You're

not in until you correctly answer these questions.

Which is better? Bass guitar or riding elks? So

a round of applause for riding elks. Round of

applause for bass guitar. All right. Bass guitar.

How many miles in a marathon? I'm just gonna

go with Jet Pack. I'm not gonna sample the

crowd on that one. Who is the smartest person

alive? Steven Hawking, Hitler. OK. Other. Let's say Katrina

Owens. All right.

Oh. Right I should probably, like, enter that. Name

any former U.S. President if he had been born

in an alternate universe where all humans were named

after plant life. The fuck? K. Very good. How

would you rate your experience so far? It's actually.

Are you currently or have you ever been a

member of any of the following: Al-Qaeda, the Federal

Reserve Bank of Cleveland, the American Dental Association, any

seagull conservation society or any pro-seagull organization of any

kind, or the Oakland PD? Have you ever been

involved in the production of sale of little mission

cars that shiners drive during parades? No.

What is the secret password? Great. I just typed

in the word secret to see what'd happen. Please

pick any contentious issue of the day. Take a

side. State in a hundred words or less why

you- no thanks.

How would you rate your experience so far? Oh,

look, they're fucking. Oh, fuck. Just like elections. The

results are rigged. OK. Send my application.

Your application for admission to Section Four has been

received. Thousands of people have gone through this process,

and we are still reviewing those applications. We'll get

back to them slash me at some point after

now.

And then we have this Whiskey Friday community which

is about bringing people together in a very complex

celebration at the end of the week, on a

Friday, you drink whiskey. That's it. That's it. That's

it.

So. I wanted to, I'm gonna actually - oh

wait, I have plenty of good time. So here's

what happened with, part of what happened with us

is we were some heavy, like, word-based people. And

we found the, the folks who built that website

with us, slash for us, were called I Shot

Him, and they were a design animation studio. Won

a lot of awards for really beautiful infographics and

visual story-telling, and we were meanwhile coming out of

this Onion background of, like, word-based storytelling. So we

just decided to combine forces and create Vultron.

Here is what we released for our merger.

VIDEO-

[music]

The merger!

[knocking]

Ooh!

[machine sounds]

Ice cream!

[music]

Cake!

[music]

Pizza!

[music]

Beer!

Party! Party! Party! Party! Party!

[music]

Hot tub!

[music]

Ferris wheel!

[music]

Yeah!

[music]

[rumbling]

[applause]

I Shot Him and Cultivated Wit are now one

creative super group. That felt good. Like, really good.

I need a moment.

B.T.: So that's, that. Oh, good. Yay. Applause. And

now let's risk the live demo again. So you

guys remember when, so we have this thing in

the U.S. It's the Constitution, right. And, in it

it sets forth a certain job of member of

congress. And presumably attached to that job is doing

it. But in late October last year, Congress, one

of the few designated constitutional jobs in the whole

country, said, we're not gonna do it anymore. And

they shut it all down and, so people were

upset and the news was covering things and we

were like, how do we respond to this?

So we went to, you ever bought a domain

name when you're drunk? Any, round of applause everybody?

Yeah? So, we said, I wonder if fuckyoucongress dot

com is available. And surprisingly it was. And so

we bought it, and proceeded to retell the story

of the government shut down, in a manner that

was a bit more direct and in a way

that people could better understand. And so we would

find new stories that were talking about how this

shut down affected people. And then retell it in

pithier language. In more Tweetable language.

So just kind of cycling through this thing, and

it was really affective at generating and sort of

capturing the, the anger that was in people. And

then we said, OK, let's go beyond just click

rage and actually put your zip code in and

share your thoughts with your member of congress, which

for many people was the first time they knew

who their member of congress was. So that was

a nice introduction.

And then the third level was to get beyond

all that and to really get people registered through

Turbo Vote to be connected to Rootstrikers and Sunlight

Foundation, to actually engage in a more production way.

To take this cathartic moment, which is very political,

take this profanity, this great word, which is fuck.

It's just, it's just a great word.

Thank you. Thank you. Five people. I feel like

maybe there was a policy paper issued right before

you did it which said do not celebrate the

word fuck. So yeah, that was, that was a

ton of fun. Now, for things that have less

to do with that. Oh yeah, and I left

that in there for a little bit but I'm

not gonna talk about that, cause I'd rather get

to the actual meat, which is less about where

I've been or where the groups I've been attached

to have been, where I think we can all

go in terms of brain creativity and humor, storytelling

broadly speaking, and technology and coding, closer together. Cause

I've straddled that line myself. I've overseen development teams,

having been a terrible programmer - bless you by

the way.

So here is my weird theory of how these

worlds can and should come together to be more

interesting than they are apart. I've never shared this

before. This is, you're getting the, the new, new

theory as articulate in this way.

When you think about, and you can think about

the word comedy as media, you can think of

the word story, vague creativity in big quotation marks.

Code doesn't have to mean exactly software programming or

engineering. It can mean technology, broadly speaking. But we've

been in this world, it's level one world, where

you're kind of using each other as a means.

It's like, oh, I have a comedic video and

I'm going to cut and paste it over a

transport method over the internet, and call it like,

Innovations! Like, no, it's just like a slice of

TV shipped differently. It's not, you're not changing the

underlying nature of the type of humor that, that's

happening there. So it's not necessarily innovation happening in

that particular view of the world.

If you get a little closer, you kind of

bring these things together, part of what happens is,

people putting jokes and humor in places not designed

for them. There's a container, and folks will shove

creativity into it, with or without permission. Here is

an example. I know you see a lot of

this in performance art and UX insertion.

So, five years ago, we had the swine flu.

Huge news, viral thing. Much more than the actual

H1N1 virus spread, and I had a thought, which

is there a Twitter account for the swine flu?

The answer was yes. There were three. They were

all distributing legitimate scientific information about the swine flu,

which I thought was a missed opportunity.

So I create the underscore swine underscore flu as

a very extreme personality, a condescending, all-knowing, arrogant and

profane little creature who would, doo doo doo, there

we go. Right, this is the_swine_flu. Angry little piglet.

Bird flu ain't got shit on me. Location, fucking

everywhere. And the most fun of this character lived

out through a Twitter account, which is obviously not

new now but at the time was not done

very much was playing with the mechanics of Twitter

in the process. Because there was a lot of

auto notifications set up. If you got a new

follower, Twitter would just email you and tell you

and even give you the chance to opt out

of that early on.

So I would find people who were talking about

the swing flu, especially those who were expressing a

fear of contracting the swine flu, and I would

follow those people, and then that would trigger an

event. An email shows up in their box saying

you are now being followed by the_swine_flu.

That's a new type of joke that's happening, right.

That's like time delayed delivery. It's like a doppler

effect on a punch line. Like, I don't even

know what that's called, but it's not stand up.

It's something else.

It's interesting. And, and, it did, it wasn't coding,

but it was sort of taking advantage of the

mechanics of the system, the MayorEmmanual Twitter account, the,

obviously yeah, the this town is a ton of

fun and sort of using the idea of character

played out in a different medium. Not on an

SNL sketch, but through this feed that we're all

taking part in and having that interruption of this

character in the same life that follows BBC news

accounts and, you know, your other friends from the

Twitter-verse.

So there's another example of this that I did

not orchestrate at all, merely witnessed. The Onion ran

this story, many years back. Planned Parenthood opens eight

billion dollar abortion plex. That's obviously not true. Or

you think it's obviously not true, but a member

of congress, that same congress from earlier, he posted

this to his Facebook page, he said, this is

what we're up against. We've got to stop this,

right.

And I think he did that because he's a

fucking idiot, right. But also I think it's also

just like, we're in a fast news cycle, click

clack clock, whatever, who knows? And it pre-alligned with

his worse fears, and he was like probably. He

saw this probably, I don't know, what's eight billion

dollars? I work for congress. I don't know how

to count. So there you go.

So that was sort of interesting. More interesting was

watching the community take this identity and put it

somewhere it didn't exactly belong. Yelp. Some enterprising fan

slash reader slash community member said, you know what,

there should be an abortion plex, and then cre,

you can build a building without building a building.

It's like cheaper than Second Life, too, and so

took all the cues from the story, put it

in the appropriate town. And that would have been

interesting. What was amazing was that this creation attracted

283 reviews of the abortion plex. Such average-length essays

as this one, this four-star reviews. I stopped by

here to check it out because I got a

gift card from my friend, who told me that

the abortion plex has the best memosas and performs

the best abortions. Let me tell you, I am

a sucker for both.

And more. Just more, more, more, more, more. Now

it's not on Yelp anymore. So this is the

history. Maybe it's on internet archives in some version.

Venmo, which is a bill paying system heavily with

roommates and colleagues and friends splitting bills, and a

common feature is a little notes field that they

default to share publicly. And one of our bloggers,

Mike Filly, dug into, what's going on with these

Venmo payments? And people are putting ridiculous excuses for

why they are paying people in this public feed.

Going a whole week without peeing the bed, there

you go, who's a good little Mikey? For purchasing

a couple of life-threatening alcoholic beverages that may have

set my life on a path to ruin. Twenty

dollars, that's a pretty good deal.

So that was fun. And then there's, you know,

from the other side, because I'm biasing this towards

people who think as writers and sort of performers

and sort of performing in a new medium. But

it also comes from the engineering side, and I'm

still impressed by this example. So we're gonna do

it live, again, let's risk it all. Google Voice.

They've got a neat little feature, which lets you

send SMS from your computer, for now. They are

merging it to hangouts, which is a whole nother

thing, cause apparently like an IM is now a

hangout, and an email is a Google, like, we're

all Google plus users now because we have Google

accounts. Whatever.

You're typing your SMS, and watch that character counter

go down, right. And then it turns over. You

saw that turn over right here. Now we're in

message two, and there's a hundred-fifty left. And this

is what I do. You should test software. So

I always, when I see an input field, I

just want to push it and see what happens.

Right? That's amazing!

Someone approved that! You know what I'm saying? They

committed and it shipped, and they didn't pull it

back. This has been up for years. And it

just, it's a beautiful reminder that there's people making

these things. And they're people who have a sense

of humor. And there's judgment in those people. I

kind of, and, and for me it triggers a

response because I sometimes get those text messages from

friends. It's just so long, it's like, why don't

you just email? You know there's a whole nother

app you could use for this.

And so I would, what they should do is

like auto compose an email message if you keep

going. But that's my humble suggestion to. Well, they're

shutting it down so it doesn't matter. But it

was fun. It was fun. So, the, the third

level's the biggest one. It's the most interesting to

me, which is, these circles are so overlapped you're

actually co-creating, and there's almost humor in the code

and code in the humor, and it's not just

a hijacking or a misuseful application. It's natively built

to create a new world. A universal build, if

you will, across these two very different potentially domains.

So I mentioned our comedy hack days, and I

want to show you a little bit of what

one team did at comedy hack day. Doo doo

doo. All right. Cool.

So this is, would be, one of our co-founders,

Craig Canon, he's the guy that we feed the

Redbull and occasional sunlight. He said, what would happen

if I took my awkward comedy friends and paired

them with my awkward developer friends? What you get

is something really, really beautiful. Here is an example.

VIDEO:

WEST HAZARD: How are you guys doing? Everybody doing

good? Thank you so much for having us here!

We're so happy to be at Hack Day. We

are Sly Sound, I am West Hazard, this is

Trevor Burnham, and we're here to tell you about

an app that we feel is gonna have everyday

usability for almost everybody in this room. You want

to talk a little bit about it Trevor?

TREVOR BURNHAM: Sly Sound works just like Shazaam, except

without the embarrassment of everyone around you knowing that

you're using Shazaam. When you open it up, it

looks just like you're checking your Twitter feed. Because,

in fact, you are checking your Twitter feed. It's

all there. But meanwhile, in the background, silently, it's

listening for music, and when it identifies a track,

it's going to text you that information. So you'll

look like a cool guy who's just checking your

Twitter and then getting a bunch of texts instead

of using Shazaam.

Basically, we've created Shazaam for Hipsters.

W.H.: And what better way to do a hipster

audio app than using obsolete technology for no other

reason than that it looks kind of cool? Here

we go.

[music]

Wow! That's an amazing track! Who was that?

T.B.: What, you don't know, Anita Tijoux? That's one

of her best tracks. 1977.

W.H.: No! I never heard, what's your deal?

T.B,: She's a French-Chilean MC. She used to be

in Makiza. Come on man.

W.H.: Oh wow. Is she, is she like big

in America now?

T.B.: Not especially, but that song was used in

an episode of Breaking Bad. I think it was

season four, episode five.

W.H.: Wow!

B.T.: Which is how we all talk, obviously. I

also love that his definition of a cool guy

is just someone who gets lots of texts, just

all the time. That's how you know you're cool.

Which in some ways is how we define it.

So that's one example. The other, which I'll show

you, I think I will show you - yes.

So, the winning team from that last event, that

was at the MIT media lab, they built a

web site which builds web sites. Dynamically. I think

it's probably gonna take a lot of work from

some of the people in this room. It's a

great party game, in fact. You put in a,

preferably a proper noun. Maybe a person of some

kind of note. And it will generate a crazy

looking conspiracy website, like, the kind your uncle forwards

you that's talking about building seven and like the

Illuminati and, someone who listened to Ali Jones a

little bit too much. So I will put in

Ruby on Rails.

And let's see what the truth about Ruby on

Rails is. I have signed document from biologers confirming

evolution of third sun humanoid in conjunction with Ruby

on Rails! JEWISH GOD, CHRISTIAN GOD, MUSLIM GOD. All

sanctioned Ruby on Rails in holy writ! Sex was

meant to include Ruby on Rails!

Eight stripped away, five returned plus sixth redeemed only

by Ruby on Rails. WAKE UP! Ruby on Rails

is a gift and the SHEEP are keeping it

hidden!

Now this page just goes. And goes. And goes.

Like there is gifs going on here. And if

you refresh it, it's gonna generate a whole new

website. God is the only true Ruby on Rails.

Ruby on Rails is the only true god. And

it sort of tiles these images and does, really,

I think, really sort of hand-crafted web art that

we're looking at here. So that was a lot

of friend. You should put your friends through the

Ruby truthforhumanity dot com generator.

And the, the last thing that I'll share with

you, magic story maker is the second to last

thing. If you have kids, you know how annoying

they can be, and how useless. The combination. That

venn diagram is very painful, for economic growth at

least. And so, when kids want you to read

to them, they often pick the same book over

and over and it gets very frustrating, because you're

getting dumber every time.

What these developers and comedians built was Magic Story

Maker. It lets you choose a new story that

you like and then apply a themed children's design

theme on top of that. So the real news

looks like a children's book. And you can actually

know what's going on in the grown-up world and

your kid can see a monkey sliding up and

down a tree and everybody wins.

The, the most recent thing, I just actually came

in from MIT on this trip, is looking at

Google Glass and performance. Google Glass and improv comedy.

Google Glass is a very creepy thing in some

ways. It's very interesting in others. It's very expensive

no matter how you look at it. And so

working with two teams there, an improv team in

Boston and these developers who've created something called Where

Script, that lets anybody build on Glass as a

platform, we came up with a show concept. Let's

do improv comedy, right here in Chicago there's a

huge following for all that. And let's have the

players wearing Glass. And let's think about the interaction

with the audience differently.

There's often games in improv, where players will pick

a word out of a hat that's been submitted.

This takes the friction out of that, and they

just get it on their display. We also said,

let the audience see what the players know, but

not have the players see what each other see.

So what you're seeing on this grid here are

the heads up of everybody's different screens, there were

six players, at various times.

So I'm actually gonna skip that example due to

time, but the more interesting one. Let's play this.

VIDEO:

SPEAKER: Present their product. Present their pitch. And we're

gonna decide which one we want to find. Our

next pitch please!

PRESENTER1: Folks, I have spent the last sixteen months

and several hundred thousand dollars developing a product that

I know you're going to love. Now, how many

times a day do you have ideas that you

need to write down? Multiply that by how many

times a day you need to get something to

eat. Wouldn't it be convenient if the surface on

which you wrote this down, i.e. paper, were also

something that you could fold into a delicious sandwich.

I've been studying it in Tokyo, and I've formed

what I call the origami sandwich, a foldable sandwich

in the shape of a goose that you can

use to not only eat, but enjoy its beauty

and all of its forms.

SPEAKER: Thank you very much! Next pitch please.

PRESENTER2: Fear! Passion! Headaches!

B.T.: Right? So it's got this PowerPoint karaoke feel,

but the realtimeness of it sort of changes the

speed and dynamic of the creativity. This last one,

and this truly is the last, so, they are,

there's a game called Jump Genre, and you kind

of, in the real world, a director might call

out switch the genre, but because of the speed

of audience input, it happens mid-motion. This is the

last clip and then I will try to respect

your time.

VIDEO

SPEAKER: The next we are gonna do is called

Jump Genre. And I'm gonna have Will and Kristine

begin a scene that is going to take place

in a location which we'll see in just a

second here. And there we go. Look at that.

And periodically throughout the scene, they're gonna get some

styles or genre on their glass that they are

going to use to shift where they are and

what they're doing.

WILL: Do you hear that?

CHRISTINE: No. But I feel it.

WILL: Do you feel that?

CHRISTINE: Yeah.

WILL: Behind the clothes! It's a clue! And a

monster! Ah! Ah! No! Save me!

CHRISTINE: No! I'm sorry, I can only save one

of us. I'm gonna have to save myself.

WILL: Wait, no, no, no!

CHRISTINE: Yes!

WILL: No, please.

CHRISTINE: I am that monster! Now I-

WILL: The way-

CHRISTINE: Now I am the monster!

WILL: The way you hold that knife is so

romantic.

CHRISTINE: I'm gonna make love to you and then

I'm gonna murder you.

B.T.: Right? So, look, yeah, clap for them. Clap

for them. I mean, I wasn't on stage there.

I talked to the people behind the engineering on

the Glass Eye. Like, they have a custom server.

You can remote control six heads up at the

same time. And what we're trying to look at

now is that who changes more? Like, sometimes the,

these performers are not used to the abruptness of

that interruption. Obviously. The technology has never been used

this way and so they're both editing each other.

And we're gonna be creating new types of apps,

they, I'm gonna advise from a great distance, through

smart emails, and the performers are gonna have to

adjust in some other interesting way. But that's the

super overlap that I hope for. And as you

guys do the things you do, you're building a

whole new world for us, I'd just love you

to keep the fun, the creative, the collaborative in

mind. Push from where you're going already. And think

about this escalating level of creation. It's the future.

It's awesome. And thank you for having me. Enjoy

your conference.

Rails for life!
